---
layout: post
title: Background
description: Breath-Hold (BH) induced Cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR) measures the ability of the brain’s vasculature to respond to a vasodilatory stimulus. However, BH movement artifacts are time-locked with the vasodilatory signal of interest, potentially introducing considerable bias on CVR estimates. We compare different strategies based on Multi-Echo (ME) BOLD fMRI to clean BH data.
image: background.png
---

Cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR) measures the ability of the brain’s vasculature to respond to a vasodilatory stimulus, such as CO2 , and is an emerging imaging metric of cerebrovascular health. Breath-Hold (BH) induced CVR mapping is a valid alternative to gas inhalation challenges [1] with functional MRI. Although BH is non-invasive, highly tolerable, and relatively easy to implement, BH-derived CVR maps can be confounded by task-correlated movement, large vessel signals, and variability in task performance. This makes it challenging to explore true variability in the CVR response, both across grey matter and across timepoints. To our knowledge, no previous work has evaluated the variability of CVR estimates across beyond two scanning sessions.
Alternatively, resting state fMRI data can be used to estimate CVR [2,3] with reduced concern over the aforementioned confounds. Resting State Fluctuation Amplitude (RSFA) is generally associated with physiological responses [4]. However, these surrogate metrics may not map identical vascular parameters, and may not reflect the same underlying brain physiology. In this study, we present the first longitudinal study comparing BH and RS CVR maps over 10 sessions, spaced one week apart, using multi-echo acquisition to minimize noise artifacts and increase BOLD sensitivity. We assess the variability in these CVR estimates over time, and compare patterns in CVR across grey matter with known spatial patterns of functional neural networks.
